The Project Gutenberg eBook of The story of Puff
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The story of Puff

Author: Mrs. C. M. Livingston

Release date: December 3, 2025 [eBook #77391]

Language: English

Original publication: Boston: D. Lothrop and Company, 1883


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF PUFF ***

Transcriber's note: Unusual and inconsistent spelling is as printed.



[Illustration: DODY.]



                          THE STORY OF PUFF


                                  BY

                        MRS. C. M. LIVINGSTON


                            [Illustration]


                                BOSTON
                        D. LOTHROP AND COMPANY
                            FRANKLIN STREET



                            COPYRIGHT, 1883.
                        D. LOTHROP AND COMPANY.



                              CONTENTS.

   CHAPTER I

   CHAPTER II

   CHAPTER III

   CHAPTER IV

   CHAPTER V



                            ILLUSTRATIONS.

   Dody
   A little Girl came with a Basket
   Rita and Dody
   What a lovely Spot my Home was
   They brought me fresh Chickweed
   They eat Bugs
   On the Bough of a tall Tree
   Making a Breakfast of Cherries
   Fred spread his Wings
   Somebody said "Here he comes"
   Dody cried as if her Heart would break
   Rita
   On the Wing
   A Drink of Water
   Then they had a Dog
   Grandma and Rose
   I saw myself in a Mirror
   Dear Rose lay on a Bed of Flowers
   Since Rosie died
   When I saw other Birds
   Making a lovely Nest
   Such a Chattering as they kept up
   I heard a great long Me-ow
   I guess they were Cousins
   Everything looks fresh and clean
   My Friends took long Journeys
   How dreary the pretty World began to look



[Illustration]



                           STORY OF PUFF.

CHAPTER I.

[Illustration] I belong to the Canary family, and that is a very good
old family as everybody very well knows. The first that I can remember
of anything was the time that I was taken away from my mother and
brothers and sisters. A little girl came with a basket after me. She
had on a blue dress and a white sunbonnet, and her name was Rita. I was
frightened almost to death, and screamed with all my might when she
took hold of me; my mother screamed too, and spread out her wings and
scolded, but it did no good. I was hurried into the basket, the cover
shut down tight, and there I was in the dark. It was dreadful. I could
hardly breathe.

[Illustration: A LITTLE GIRL CAME WITH A BASKET.]

When she got home, she took me out of the basket and put me in a small
wire cage. I curled up in one corner, and did not dare to look about me
for a long time. They brought me some supper, but I would not taste it.
I was only just learning to feed myself; my dear mother used to feed
me nice bits from her bill; my heart swelled right up in my throat. I
could not have eaten if I had tried.

When it began to grow dark, I cried as hard as I could: we used to
cuddle down under mother's wings and go to sleep; I thought my heart
would break. Towards morning I tucked my bill in my neck, and snugged
down in a heap with one foot under me and got a little sleep.

I was wakened next morning by the sun shining right into my cage. I was
glad of it, for I had been quite cold. My feathers were not so very
thick yet. Pretty soon two little girls, Rita and her sister Dody, came
and talked to me. Dody was a little bit of a round-faced girl, with
bright blue eyes and red cheeks.

I loved her right away. She said "Poor birdie!" and her voice was as
sweet as my little sister's voice when she said "peep" to me in the
mornings. They stood and looked at me a long time, and talked about me.
"How bright his eyes are!" they said, and, "What funny little feet!"
"How pretty he will be when he gets all his feathers." Then their
mother called, "Children, come to breakfast," and they ran off.

I ate a very few seeds for my breakfast, and drank a little water. Then
I tried to dress my feathers just as I had seen my dear mother do hers,
but mine would not lie down smoothly. After breakfast they came back
and talked to me again, but I never gave a single chirp in answer. It
was a long, sad day, and I was glad when night came again.

Just as I was going to bed, Dody came to the cage with her hands full
of little fixings. I wondered what she was going to do. I flew up on
the top perch and watched her. She opened the door, and in one corner
of my floor she put a piece of cotton, soft stuff like thistledown.
Then she spread some pieces of white flannel on it, and covered it with
a piece of pink stuff. Then what did she do but catch me and try to put
me in the little bed she had made.

I tried my best to make her know that birds didn't sleep in beds, but
she kept saying, "Poor Puffy was tired! Shall have a nice bed, so he
shall."

So she put me on the soft little bed, and spread the blanket and the
pink thing over me; then she took her hand off and I flew right back to
my perch.

"Why, Puffy!" she said. "You musn't do so."

Then we had another hard time. Her little hand chased me about the cage
till I was ready to drop, but she got me. She put me in the bed again
and held me down. She tucked the blanket around me, and said:

"Dear Puff, it's a very cold night; little birdies will freeze if they
don't cover up. Dody wants you to learn to sleep in a bed, just as she
does. That's no way to rest; get way up on a perch, and stand on one
foot, and stick your head in your feathers way behind you. I'll just
tell you, Puffy, we ain't going to have any such uncomfortable works in
this house. Now be still, and I'll sing you to sleep."

I wish I could tell you just how she looked while she sat there singing
her sweet little hymn:

   "Hush my dear, lie still and slumber,
    Holy angels guard thy bed."

Her singing was so sweet, and she looked so loving! If anybody could
make me sleep in a bed she could, but I wasn't going to do it not even
for her. I thought I should smother, bundled up there, and I knew I
was right, for my mother began to teach us to sleep on a perch. I kept
still, though. It was no use to flutter; she only squeezed me the
harder. Pretty soon she thought I was asleep. She softly raised her
hand, and I popped up quick as wink and was back on my top perch in no
time. Then poor Dody cried. I felt sorry for her, but I couldn't help
it. Her mother came in then, and explained it all out nice to her and
she felt better.

They all sat around then, looking at me and talking about me. They
tried to find a name for me. One said "Billy," and another said "Dick."
"Call him 'Goldy,' he is so yellow," Rita said. But their mother said,
"Better call him Puff; he looks just like a little puff ball." They
clapped their hands and cried out, "So we will; that's a sweet little
name." I never forgot my name from that day to this. I couldn't, I
heard it so much.

It was a pretty little home that I had come to. There was no fine
furniture in it, but it was snug and warm, the fire was always bright
and everybody looked sunshiny. Even when the wind blew and the snow
flew, it always seemed as if the sun shone in that room. I think
one reason was because everything went on smoothly, and there was a
good deal of singing. Rita and Dody sang all their little songs, and
evenings and Sundays their father and mother sang with them.

I never shall forget the day I began to sing myself. I didn't know I
could. I remember the very first song—Rita and Dody were singing it. It
was "Blooming May makes all gay."

It made the girls almost wild with joy when I piped out a few little
notes, no louder than a katydid's. They said, "He's going to be a
singer! Isn't that nice?"

And they ran and told their mother, and she came and stood looking at
me a long time. But I didn't sing a word while she was there. Somehow
I couldn't when they were all watching me so. They told all the
neighbors, too, and when their father came from his work, they ran to
meet him the first thing. I never could see why they made such an ado
over it. I thought birds were made on purpose to sing, and of course
they all did. But now that I come to think of it, my dear mother did
not sing. My father did all the singing in our family. She chirped a
little, but it was sweeter than any singing to me.

The cold winter went away and spring came. My cage was hung out of
doors under the apple-tree every day now, and here was a beautiful new
world, made of soft blue and pretty green and white blossoms. What a
lovely spot my home was! A little brown house, with tall old trees
around it, standing on a green hill sloping down on one side to a
little brook that rattled and hurried over the stones. The trees were
covered with pink and white blossoms, and the air was soft and sweet.

There was a wide porch where everybody came to get cool, so I had
plenty of company. There were other birds, too, who came often to the
apple-tree. I was afraid of them at first, but I soon got over that.
One by the name of Jenny Wren, built a nest just in the corner, at the
top of the porch. I enjoyed her society very much.

I grew very fast, and could sing almost as well as the birds that came
in the trees and sang in the mornings. I began to be very happy, too,
and to like my new home. Rita and Dody loved me so much, and I loved
them. They always ran to me the first thing when they came from school.
They brought me fresh chickweed and lumps of sugar, and sometimes a bit
of orange or apple, and I ate it right from their fingers. It was good,
too.

There is one thing that I never could understand, and that is why they
do not give us oranges to eat all the time when we like them better and
they are so much easier to eat than seeds. I do get very tired getting
the shells off from my seeds. I would have much more time to sing, if
I did not have to keep pecking away at those hard old things all the
time. It is a very hard way to earn one's living, I think. And yet it
is not so bad as it might be, for my friends in the apple-tree tell me
that nobody brings them anything at all, that they pick up their eating
just where they can. Sometimes they get plenty, and sometimes not. They
eat bugs and worms and all such vile things. Pah! I am sure I should
not like that. But then it must be nice to spread one's wings and fly
away up into the blue, and sit and swing on a bough of a tall tree.

[Illustration: THEY EAT BUGS.]

One morning the little girls brought me some news. They told me that a
rich lady who lived down in the village, was going away with all her
family for a month, and that she was going to pay them for taking care
of her bird while she was gone.

"So you see you are going to have company, Puffy," Rita said. "I'm
going to bring him home to-night, and you must be sure to have your
feathers all smoothed down nicely, and your best manners on, for he's
very stylish, Puffy, and he lives in a great, grand house ten times as
big as ours."

That day seemed very long to me, and I dressed my feathers a great many
times, and tried to look my best. I grew very restless as it drew near
to four o'clock, and hopped up and down stairs till I was all tired
out; for you must know my little house is three stories high. There is
the first floor, then the first perch, where I stand to reach my seeds
and water, and the second one where I sleep nights, and that makes
three stories, besides the attic where my swing is.

[Illustration: ON THE BOUGH OF A TALL TREE.]

Pretty soon I heard the gate click. I peeped through the leaves. Yes!
There he was coming, sure enough—the grand company bird. My heart
fluttered so I could hardly breathe, but I flew up-stairs with all
speed, curled down on my feet, puffed out my feathers, and tried to
look as if I didn't care.

"Here he is, Puff," Rita said, as she came up the steps of the porch
with a pretty cage in her hand. "This is Fred, Puffy; why don't you
make a bow to him?"

I straightened myself up then and looked at him, and he looked at me,
but neither of us spoke. I forgot all about manners. Rita hung his cage
very near mine, and went away, and we went on staring at each other. He
was a handsome fellow, large, and yellow as buttercups. I thought he
looked proud, he stood up so tall and stiff, and snapped his black eyes
at me, just as if he were poking fun at something. Then he went up to
his highest perch and sat and looked and looked.

I had always thought my cage was a cosey little home until his great
gilt one was put by the side of it. Then I began to feel ashamed of my
little house, so very small and plain. I remembered just then what Rita
said about manners; so I chirped a few times to him in a friendly way,
to let him know he was welcome. He never answered my chirps at all, but
just kept on staring, and I could feel that he was looking me over from
head to foot, as if he were measuring every feather I had on. Of course
I could not make as good an appearance as he did; I hadn't had so much
time to grow in.

All at once he jumped up on the highest perch he had and began to sing
with all his might. He trilled and warbled and went up and down the
scale, in and out and every way, and when he came to the high notes,
he opened his mouth as wide as he could and screamed. He certainly had
a very powerful voice, but not a sweet one. When he went up so high it
was just yelling, and that's all you can call it.

When he had finished, he cocked his head on one side and looked at me
out of the corner of his eye, as much as to say, "There! Did you ever
hear anything like that?"



CHAPTER II.

[Illustration] I WENT on cracking seeds as if I didn't hear him, but
after he had performed two or three times like that, I thought I would
show him I could sing a little, too. I knew I could, for people often
stopped at the gate as they passed, and said to each other, "What a
sweet singer that bird is!"

I had heard the wild birds sing so much that I had caught many of their
airs; so while he was taking his supper, I tuned up. I did my very
best. I was surprised at myself.

Fred was surprised, too. He dropped the seed he was biting in two,
and glared fiercely at me. Then his wings began to drop down, and
he looked very mad. Then he spread his wings till he looked like a
great bat, and flew at the side of his cage as if he would dash right
through it, and fly at me. I sung away, and he chattered and scolded
and tried his best to get out. I was glad he couldn't. I should not
have liked him to come to my cage as mad as he was then.

When I got to the end of my song, I stopped and gave him a little piece
of my mind. I don't know how I dared to speak so to a stranger, but I
guess I was a little out of patience myself.

[Illustration]

I think Fred was all worn out, for he went to bed soon after. I did not
go to sleep right away, though I went to my chamber. Somehow I didn't
feel so happy as I usually did. I knew I had not been polite or kind to
Fred, and I had been jealous and vain. I did not sleep well. I had bad
dreams. When I woke in the night, I was afraid. I heard cats walking
round I thought. I thought I would try to be a very good little bird
to-morrow.

When I woke again, the sun was shining, and Fred was already stirring.
He seemed to have forgotten how cross he had been. He said "Good
morning," and chirped away quite pleasantly.

After we had eaten breakfast, and taken a bath and dressed ourselves,
we sung. We sung together, just as loud and high as we could yell.
My throat was almost split, but I wasn't going to let him beat me.
For the first few days we did not get along very well. Fred was very
quick-tempered. He would spread his wings and open his mouth as if to
swallow me, if I said the least thing to provoke him.

Some days we had very good times. Our cages hung so near that we could
talk together all we pleased. Fred told me about his life when he was
at home; how he hung between lace curtains in a pretty window of a
large, fine house, and watched people pass all day long. And there were
a great many visitors, and they all said, "What a beautiful bird!" and
"What a wonderful singer!" And he had cake and candy, just as much as
he wanted, and oranges and bananas, and they had a piano, and when
they played, he sang with it, and people said it was as good as a
concert. He said it was very dull in that little old brown house, and
he wondered I didn't die.

And one day when he felt very good-natured, he told me that I was very
handsome, and that I had a wonderful voice, and that I ought to be out
in the world where people would admire me. He said, too, that it was
a shame to give me nothing but seeds and water to eat; that they were
mean, stingy people to treat me so. I did not like to hear him talk in
that way about my dear Rita and Dody, who were always so kind to me.
But when I came to think it over, it did seem as if I had been treated
badly, and I felt cross when Dody filled my seed-cup. I wouldn't touch
one for quite a while.

I sat and pouted half the morning, and Dody thought I was sick. She
went and told her mother how I acted. Her mother was looking over
lettuce for dinner; beautiful green leaves they were—oh! How I wanted
to get my bill into it.

Her mother said, "Poor Puffy, he needs something fresh and green. Give
him a leaf of lettuce."

So she did—a lovely curly, tender leaf. I was going at it at once, but
I waited to see what Fred would do with his leaf. I was afraid he might
laugh at me if I ate lettuce. But when I saw him eat his as if he liked
it very much, I began on mine. It was so good. In a few days after that
the cherries were ripe, and we each had a fresh one every morning. I
felt ashamed of being so bad and talking as I had, when a great red
juicy cherry was given me every day.

[Illustration: WHAT A LOVELY SPOT MY HOME WAS.]

"I can tell you what it is," said Fred one morning, as he was nibbling
a big cherry, "it must be a very nice thing to get just as many of
these as you want. Think of our sleeping up in that big tree, all
tucked in among the leaves, then in the morning making a breakfast of
cherries, and away we'd go sailing off just where we please! No cage
for us any more! See here, Puff," and Fred came to the side of his
cage, and poked his head away out through the wires and spoke low,
"let's you and me run away!"

[Illustration: MAKING A BREAKFAST OF CHERRIES.]

The idea of such a thing almost took my breath away. I looked up in
the blue sky. The white clouds were floating along softly. What if we
could escape and fly away up, up, and stand on that soft cloud, and
sail along, sail along, through the blue forever! It would be lovely.
Just then Rita and Dody came to bring us chickweed, and we had not time
to talk about it. But when the time came for our evening song, instead
of singing a low, soft hymn, we talked again about running away. Fred
talked so much and so fast, that before I knew it I had promised to try
to escape. We made up our minds that we would go in the morning.

"The sooner we are off the better," Fred said, "for this is the
grandest time in the year. Everything is ripe—cherries and berries, and
we shall find hosts of friends as soon as we get out. I was talking
with Mr. Wren only yesterday, and he promised to help us in any way he
could."

We sat up very late that night laying our plans. We decided to slip out
when the cage doors were opened to change the water in our bath-tubs.

"Be quick as a wink when the time comes," Fred said. "Whoever gets
out first will wait on the top of that tall lilac for the other.
Good-night! We must be off to sleep now, so as to be ready for morning.
And don't you go and back out. Have some spirit about you; as if a
creature with wings ought to live in a cage, like a poor little mean
mouse!"

Then Fred stretched himself up tall, and looked very proud. He bounded
into his swing in high spirits, and soon swung himself to sleep. But I
couldn't sleep. It seemed dreadful to be going out into the great wide
world all alone. Perhaps the cats would get us, or a bad boy shoot us.
I could hear the dogs barking, and everything seemed dark and gloomy. I
wished I hadn't promised to go. Dody told me once that God took care of
little birds, but I couldn't feel sure about it that night. I started
at every noise I heard. I was very unhappy.

It was a long night, but morning came at last. Dody was up bright and
early. She brought Fred and me each a beautiful fresh clover blossom
the first thing she did. Much as I loved clover, I couldn't bear to
taste it, I felt so bad, thinking of what we meant to do. I couldn't
eat much breakfast, for when I heard the little breakfast bell tinkle,
I knew it would be time to start in a little while. I always had
sung at prayers, but I couldn't that morning. Dody sat in her little
rocking-chair and sung from her hymnbook as hard as she could. It was
a sweet hymn, and a tune I liked. But I could not sing a note, and she
kept looking at me as if she wanted to know why. Fred sang louder than
anybody.

It was but a few minutes afterwards that the girls came to attend to
us. They carried our cages out on the back porch, and brought the
seed-box and fresh water. Rita tended to me that morning, and Dody
took Fred. Dody turned her back just a minute to get the seeds. Fred's
door was open a little bit, and he stood down close by it waiting his
chance. He slipped out as swift as a butterfly! Dody gave a scream, but
Fred spread his wings and went way, way up. How beautifully he soared
along. I wished I was with him. I had no chance to get out myself, for
Rita shut my door tight and went off trying to catch Fred.

[Illustration: FRED SPREAD HIS WINGS.]

Everybody shouted and ran here and there. The neighbors all came over,
and one said, "I see him!" and another cried, "There he is!" and at
last somebody said, "Here he comes on top of the lilac. Hand me his
cage and I'll get up on the fence and hold it towards him. Maybe he'll
go in!"

[Illustration]

Maybe he didn't! Naughty Fred flew up in the tip-top branch of the
maple, and swung gayly back and forth, just as if he greatly enjoyed
seeing a woman on the fence with a red face turned up to the sky, and
an empty bird-cage in her hand. He only stayed a minute, then he flew
far away and was never seen again.

Dody cried as if her heart would break. When I saw how badly everybody
felt about Fred's getting away, I couldn't make up my mind to try to
go that day. I couldn't go if I had tried, for Rita opened and shut my
door in a flash when she waited upon me. I suppose Fred was vexed at me
because I didn't come. Rita and Dody and their mother spent nearly all
that day out doors looking for him, and they kept his cage hanging out
for him a good many days, but he did not come.

[Illustration: DODY CRIED AS IF HER HEART WOULD BREAK.]

I missed Fred very much, and felt discontented and unhappy. I did not
enjoy life as I did before he came. I was all the time wishing and
longing to be somewhere else, and to have things I had not. I did not
sing any more. I moped. I thought if I could live in a big, handsome
house, such as Fred told me about, and have a golden cage and all those
new things to eat, and see people passing back and forth all day, then
I should be happy. How could I be expected to content myself always in
this back place, seeing nothing all day long but trees and birds and
two or three people?

[Illustration: RITA.]

Sometimes I thought about following Fred, but I felt a little afraid to
go alone. I heard them say that perhaps the cats or dogs had killed him
by this time: But I kept thinking of all he had told me, and I made up
my mind at last that I would not be a prisoner any more. I would get
out and see the world. So now I spent all my time in planning how it
should be done. It would not be an easy thing to do. Rita and Dody were
so very careful they never left my door open a second. You may wonder
how it was that I could make up my mind to leave my dear friends, but
when one begins to go wrong, I guess nothing is of any account but the
thing they want to do. So night and day I thought and contrived how to
escape.

One pleasant afternoon when the little girls got home from school, they
came to pet me. They brought a great treat they thought. It was a piece
of banana. I wanted to taste it and see what it was like, but I sat
sulkily in one corner, and never touched it. They talked to me, but I
wouldn't answer.

"Oh dear," said Dody, "he's sick, I know he is."

Her little hot face looked so tired after her long walk, I ought to
have been ashamed of myself for acting so.

"Shut the windows and let him out for a little while," her mother said.
"That will rest him."

So she took my cage into the dining-room, and opened the door. I flew
right out and alighted on the window-sill. I went straight to the
window, because, I knew something that I guess Dody had forgotten.
There was a hole in one of the dining-room windows, just a little one,
no bigger than Dody's hand.

[Illustration]

"You stay here, Puffy," Dody said, "and I'll get you some nice cold
water, and you'll feel better, birdie dear. I always do when I take a
bath."

No sooner had she shut the door than I rushed up to the broken window,
and out I went! I was free—free as the wind!

I waited just a minute on the rose bush, and peeped in to see Dody
hunting under chairs and tables, and calling, "Where are you, Puffy!"

Then I said softly, "Good-by, dear Dody," and I spread my wings and
away, away. I thought I never would stop till I got up into the
beautiful blue and sat on one of those soft, white clouds.



CHAPTER III.

[Illustration] I DID stop, though, very soon, to rest me. I didn't
think when I saw the other birds skim through the air that flying would
tire me so. I kept going on toward the blue, but the white clouds
seemed just as far off as when I started.

I came to a lovely garden and stood on a honeysuckle vine a few minutes
to rest myself. The vine clambered over a porch, and I heard voices
talking and laughing. I was enjoying myself very much snuffing the
sweet air from the honeysuckle, when a hand came softly down over me
and drew me in through the vines.

It was so sudden I had no time to get away, and my heart fluttered
with fear. The hand was soft and white, and I found when I dared to look
up that the owner of it was a beautiful young lady. She was dressed in
gauzy white stuff, and was such a pretty creature that I thought I should
like to stay with her always.

"Do see what I have found," she said to another lady. "A darling little
canary."

Then there gathered about me ever so many ladies dressed in silks and
jewels. They talked to me and called me a beauty, and wondered if I
could sing.

One lady called a girl, and said, "Angeline, go up in the attic and
bring down that old bird-cage."

Then they put me in it and the lady said, "Hang it in the dining-room."

It was near a window that I was placed, and not long after I saw the
pretty young lady who caught me, get in a carriage and go away.

I heard them say, "Better take your bird home with you."

But she said, "No, if nobody comes to claim him, he shall belong to
Rose."

And who was Rose? I did not find out that night for I soon went to
sleep, tired out with my journey. I had time in the morning to look
about me before the rest got up. Here I was at last in a large fine
house such as Fred told me about. I could see through into the parlor,
and there were the lace curtains and pictures, and ever so many pretty
things. It was better than being free to live in such a place. I was
almost wild with joy. I sung at the top of my voice, and swelled out
my feathers till I was three times as big as usual. I should never
have any more trouble; everybody would praise me, and I should have
everything I wanted. I thought there was only one thing lacking to make
me perfectly happy. I wanted a big gold cage like Fred's.

While I was watching them set out the table in a scarlet and white
cloth, and china and silver, just wonderful to see, a little girl
danced into the room and came toward me.

"Good morning, little birdie," she said. "What's your name? My name's
Rose."

Her voice was low and sweet, and she looked like one of the little
pinkish-white roses that clamber over the porch at Dody's house. Her
eyes were blue, like the sky, and her gold hair hung on her shoulders
in pretty waves. I was glad I belonged to Rose. I was just thinking
what a nice place I had come to, when I heard a great noise and a boy
burst into the room with a whoop and a yell. I trembled when I saw him,
for I had heard about boys. He was short and chubby, with very black
eyes and hardly no hair on his head—I guess his feathers hadn't grown
out.

"Hulloa!" he said. "Who's this?"

Then he poked his fingers through the wires and hooted at me, and kept
me flurrying about from side to side, frightened almost to death.

Rose said, "Please, Rob, don't tease him. See, he's afraid, poor
birdie!"

He paid no attention to her, though, and I was glad when the breakfast
bell called him away. After breakfast both he and Rose went off to
school.

It was pretty quiet all day. The dining-room was darkened to keep out
the flies, and nobody brought me any nice little bit to eat. I had
nothing but seeds and water. I missed my cuttle-bone and my chickweed.
I began to be lonely, and to wish I could see Dody. Then I sat and
thought just how the little room looked with the roses peeping in at
the window. I could see my empty cage hanging there, and dear Dody sad
and lonely. A little whisper from somewhere asked me whether I did
right to run away, and if, after all, I was going to like my new home
so very much better than the old. But I hushed it up with a very loud
song.

In a few days something happened. Angeline cane walking in with a great
beautiful gilt cage in her hand, larger and handsomer than Fred's even.
She opened its door, then she opened my door and put the open doors
close together. I stood and looked at it in great astonishment and
delight.

Then Angeline said, "Why don't you go in, you little goose?"

I didn't like being called a goose, nor did I think it was a polite
way to invite me. But I stepped in, and she shut the door and carried
the old cage away. Then she took the new cage into the back parlor,
and fastened it on a pretty gilt chain that hung down from the ceiling
between the lace curtains of the window. There! Now I had everything
just as I wanted it. Was it I, or somebody else, in that great bright
cage among the lace curtains, looking out on the gay street? I danced
up-stairs and down, and strutted about and tried to look like Fred.
I nibbled the cuttle-bone, and took a seed and a drink of water, and
tried to sing a little to express my feelings. But, somehow, it seemed
as if my throat was all swelled up. I couldn't sound a note.

[Illustration: A DRINK OF WATER.]

You would think that then, surely, I was perfectly happy, with
everything so nice and a dear little mistress who loved me. But, oh,
that boy! I knew as soon as I saw him that my troubles had begun. He
seemed to have a great many names. Most of the time it was "Bob,"
but Rose called him "Rob." When he was going to bed his mother said,
"Good-night, Robbie," and his father said "Robert!" when he was
naughty, and that was most of the time. Saturdays he nearly tortured
the life out of me. He would catch me, and squeeze me till I was almost
choked. He would poke at my eyes, and open my mouth and try to get hold
of my tongue. I tried to get away from him. If I could, I would have
gone out of the window and left everything, and never have come back.
Schools ought not to have Saturdays. Rose was in school all the week,
and Saturdays she often went to visit her cousins, so nobody knew how
the naughty boy tormented me.

I began to find out that Fred had told only the bright side of things.
As the weeks passed away, I got tired of the life I led. It was fun at
first to watch the people pass, but at last I got very tired watching
them come and go, come and go all day long. Some of them looked cross,
and some looked sad, and nobody looked very happy. It wasn't half so
nice, after all, as hanging under the apple-tree and having calls from
the other birds that flew about. Here no birds came to see me, except
one ill-natured old sparrow, and he came to pick a quarrel with me. He
would dart at my cage when the window was open, his mouth stretched
and his eyes fierce as cat's eyes, I learned how to manage him after
a while. I would just get back in the further corner of my cage, keep
perfectly still, and look at him. So he got ashamed of himself and left
me in peace. That was one of my troubles. I had others.

Some days I nearly starved. Everybody would go off and forget me. Not
a drop of fresh water, not a seed in my cup, I thought many a day I
should die before night. I would get so weak I couldn't sing, and I sat
sad and cross and remembered how Rita and Dody never forgot me once.
Rose would have seen to me if her mother had allowed her to, but I
was left to the care of servants, and Rose went to school very early
and did not know how badly I was treated. There were days, though,
when I had everything and more too; sugar and orange and berries and
cake. Then I often made myself sick. I would rather have had something
steady, even if it was plain.

I was very lonely, too. Nobody seemed to have time to give me a kind
word. Once when I had sung one of my best songs and did the high notes
beautifully, a young man sitting in the room reading a newspaper, said,
"What a horrid screecher that bird is. He ought to have his neck wrung!"

Think of that when I had been doing my best to please him! I didn't
sing any more for a good many days. I just stood on my highest perch,
and looked into the street to see if I couldn't see Rita and Dody
coming to take me home. Day after day I tired myself all out watching,
but they never came. It was dusty in that window, too. My eyes and nose
were full of it. I thought of the pure air in my other home; how sweet
the roses smelled in the porch; and Rita and Dody were there and I was
not. Oh! If I had only been content in the dear little place. Now I
never should see it again. They were better folks, too, in the little
house. They never spoke angry words to each other. But in this house I
heard a great many; besides there were no prayers and hymns there.

I had worse enemies, too, than Bob, I found out after awhile. One day,
when Angeline took me into the kitchen to clean my cage, she left me
standing on the kitchen table while she talked with another girl that
put her head over the back fence. I was looking about the room, when to
my horror I saw stretched out behind the stove a great long gray cat. I
kept as still as a mouse—hardly breathed. It was dreadful! What if she
should wake up? I had heard awful stories about cats.

I never took my eyes from her. Sure enough she did wake up just then.
She stretched herself and washed her face, and then got up and walked
about. I kept still. I didn't dare to scream as long as she had not
seen me. All of a sudden she turned her head and saw me. Oh, what
frightful big yellow eyes she had! She gave one great bound and sprang
up on the table. Then I screamed loud and sharp, and Angeline rushed
in, just as that dreadful monster had her paw raised all ready to
strike at me.

Angeline took a broom and sent that cat out of the door pretty fast.
Then she talked real nice to me, and comforted me, and I thought more
of her than I ever did before.

[Illustration: THEN THEY HAD A DOG.]

Then they had a dog, too. He was another trouble. He was white as snow,
and had little curls all over him, and wore a blue ribbon around his
neck. His name was Beauty. He didn't act very beautiful. He tormented
me too. He would jump up towards me, and bark furiously whenever he
came into the parlor. I did not really think he could catch me, but it
made me nervous.

The only happy moments I ever had was when I was alone with dear Rose.
She was so gentle, and seemed to love me so much. She would put her
face to mine and say low, sweet words. She called me "Tina," after the
pretty young lady. Her name was Christina. Sometimes Rose took me to
her room. Then she would open my cage door and tell me to fly. She shut
all the windows first, or I think I should have run away again to get
rid of my tormentors. But I did have good times in her room. I flew all
about and it rested me. I sat on her pretty white bed, and on the tops
of chairs, and walked all over the bureau and saw myself in the mirror.

[Illustration: GRANDMA AND ROSE.]

I thought at first that I was meeting a stranger. I said to myself,
"That's a good-looking little fellow; wonder who he is?" Then I bowed
and talked to him, and he, impertinent fellow, just mimicked me for
everything I did and said. Then I scolded at him, and he scolded back.

[Illustration: SAW MYSELF IN A MIRROR.]

I began to feel cross, and I was just getting ready to fight him when
Rose said, "Why, Tina, that's yourself!" And grandma who sat in the
room said, "He's as foolish as some touchy boys and girls are; ready to
quarrel with their own shadows." Then I can tell you I felt ashamed.

Grandma was another good friend of mine. She always made Bob let me
alone when she happened to be in the room with us, and she began to
look after me every day, and see if I had some nice little bit to eat.
Whenever she ate an orange, she always gave a piece to me. She was
a pretty old lady. Her hair was white as snow. She wore black silk
dresses and white lace caps, and her face looked as if everything was
just as she liked to have it.



CHAPTER IV.

[Illustration] WHEN I was alone with grandma or Rose, I enjoyed myself.
Rose taught me to come out when she called me, perch on her finger
and eat sugar from her lips. I knew one or two tunes that she played
on the piano, and I would sit on her shoulder and sing them while she
played. I learned to kiss her good-night too. When there was company,
she always showed me off. Sometimes she would let me stay out all the
afternoon when we were in her room. I loved to watch her. She used to
look so pretty in her white dress and blue ribbons, flitting round
like a butterfly. I sung a good many songs all to her, telling her how
pretty and good she was, and how much I loved her.

It was only once in a while on Saturdays that I had such good times.
All the rest of the week I hung in that window and heard wagons rattle
by, and wished so much that I could hear the brook gurgling over the
stones by the little brown house, and smell the flowers, and see Dody.

One Saturday Rose's cousin came after her to spend the day. I watched
her getting ready with a sad heart, for I knew Bob would tease me as
soon as she was gone. And sure enough, no sooner was she gone than
he began to poke a stick through the wires at me. I was patient for
a while, and kept out of the reach of it by lively work. Then I got
cross, I opened my mouth wide at him, and dropped my wings and scolded.
He only laughed at that. Then he caught me. I slipped away from him
ever so many times at first, and bumped my head and bruised my sides.
But at last I was fast, and he squeezed me tight and tried to bend my
legs the wrong way, and put his little black fingers in my mouth. I bit
him then, so he pulled out one of my longest, brightest feathers, to
pay me off, he said. That hurt me, and I screamed so that grandma came
to see what was the matter. I was trembling like a leaf.

She sent Bob off, then she took me in her own hands, talked low to
me, and cuddled me up in her soft neck and smoothed my feathers down
gently, and took the mad all out of me. Little girls are nice and
pretty, and so are young ladies, but grandmas are best when you get
into trouble. This grandma always seemed to be around when I was
frightened almost to death. I loved her dearly.

One day I sat gazing idly into the street, and who should I see but
Rita and Dody walking along! My heart jumped with joy! Were they
coming after me? I leaned over and looked down. No! They passed on. I
called and screamed to them, but the window was shut, and they did not
hear. They went on. I was almost sick the rest of that day, I was so
disappointed.

[Illustration: DEAR ROSE LAY ON A BED OF FLOWERS.]

But, oh me! I didn't know then what other hard thing was coming. For a
great many days I missed Rose, and wondered where she was. I thought
everybody looked sad, and everything looked quiet, though a good many
people were coming and going. One afternoon the folding doors were
opened, and they trimmed the doorway with pretty green vines, and the
room was filled with white flowers. Dear Rose lay on a little bed of
flowers. She was just as white as the lilies that lay all over her
pillow. It was really Rose, and she lay very still, and the pink was
all gone out of her face. I was going to pour out a glad little song
when I saw her, but when I noticed that everybody was crying and I
saw Rose did not wake up, I gave two or three sad little chirps. Rose
always used to come to me when she heard them, and say, "What's the
matter, Tina, dear?" But now she never moved.

Somebody said, "Oh that bird will break my heart."

Then a lady came and carried me away to grandma's room. I did not know
what happened next; I only know that I never saw my darling Rose again.
But I am sure God took care of her, for she was kind and loving; and,
once when she let me hang in her room all night, I saw her kneel down
and pray just as they used to do in the little brown house.

I stayed in grandma's room always after that. I think she was lonely
without her little Rose, and wanted me for company. She prayed, too,
and read a good deal from a big book.

I was very lonely and sometimes, just at dusk, grandma would sing such
sad tunes that I thought they would break my heart. One was:

   Silently the shades of evening
     Gather round my lonely door.

I never could sing with her when she hummed that, but when she sang:

   I lay my body down to sleep,
     Peace is the pillow for my head.

or

   Around the throne of God in heaven
     Thousands of children stand.

I always sang them, for it seemed as if little Rose was singing too.

I never saw the dog or cat now, and Bob didn't come into the room very
often, and grandma would not let him tease me. I don't know as he would
have done it, anyway. He seemed to feel so bad because Rose was gone.
He didn't do as much mischief as he used to. I felt sorry for him.

When winter came on and it was time to shut the doors and windows,
I enjoyed myself. Grandma let me stay out of my cage all I pleased.
I liked flying about the room and sitting up on top of a picture. I
sat on grandma's head, too, and picked her lace cap; and when she ate
apples, I sat on the arm of her chair. She would take a piece and then
give me a bite. I have sat for a long time and watched her put a shiny
needle in and out a piece of cloth. It was very funny work. I played
with her spools, and her spectacles when she took them off. I think a
bird would look very funny with little spectacles on.

Sometimes grandma's tea was sent up to her. Then I took tea with her. I
took nibbles right out of the bread on the plate, and dipped my bill in
the butter. I always noticed that people ate bread and butter together.
I ate a little cake and some peaches, and walked all over the table and
she never said "stop," once.

Grandma had some nice plants, and I had fine times with them. Sometimes
I stayed all day among them. I enjoyed picking in the earth, and I
played that I lived out doors, and that I had great, beautiful grounds,
all my own, and that the high plants were my tall trees, and the little
ones my rose bushes and lilacs. There was one big geranium that was my
very tallest tree. When I felt tired, I played it was night and flew
into my big tree and hid among the sweet-scented leaves and went to
sleep. It was just beautiful. Sometimes I played that I had a great
many brothers and sisters, or that each one of the pots was the house
of one of my friends, and I would go out calling and have long talks
with them; or they would come to visit me. I couldn't help thinking at
times how nice it would be if Fred were there too. I suppose we would
have quarreled if he had, for Fred always wanted his own way, and that
shows me that I must have wanted my own way too, or there wouldn't have
been anything to quarrel about. Grandma says that one can't quarrel
alone. I heard her tell Bob so.

Once I did something very bad. Grandma went out and stayed a long time,
and I got into great mischief. She had one handsome, fresh-looking
plant, with bright green leaves. I never thought of eating any of them,
but I happened to take a little nip out of this one. It didn't taste
very good, but the leaves were tender and crisp, like lettuce, and I
liked to snap out bits of it. It made me think of summer. I didn't mean
to take all the leaves off. I worked real fast and it was good fun,
but when I saw it stand there all bare, not a leaf left, I began to be
frightened. When I heard grandma coming, I hid in the big geranium. I
kept very still, and she didn't find me for ever so long.

When she spied the plant with all the leaves gone, I heard her say
"O-h!" She called and called me, "Where are you, naughty little
fellow?" I heard her say, but I never stirred.

My heart beat so loud I was afraid she would hear it. By that time I
was so sorry and ashamed I most hoped she never would find me. She
looked on the top of the windows and under the chairs; then she stooped
down and looked in among the plants, and before I knew it, her hand was
over me and I was caught.

As she put me in the cage and shut the door, she said, "Bad birdie; you
must be punished for this. I cannot let you take tea with me to-night,
nor let you out again for a good many days."

Oh, how I felt when I saw her supper brought in, I watched Angelina
while she drew out the little round table, and put a pretty buff cloth
on it, and set it out with china dishes all covered with pink flowers
and butterflies, and then brought cunning little biscuit and cold meat,
and preserves and cake—frosted cake too. Then she brought the little
silver tea-pot smoking hot, and supper was all ready and I couldn't
come to it. Oh, dear! If I only hadn't done it!

I've often wondered when I saw Bob doing naughty things why he did them
when he knew he'd have to suffer for it in some way, and here I had
been acting just like him. I stood right at the corner where I could
see best and leaned my head out and watched grandma while she ate. How
I did want to get on to that table! When she was through, she gave me a
bit of cake, but I don't think I deserved it. I made up my mind never
to be naughty again, though.

I could have been quite happy that winter, if we had not missed Rose
so much. My heart was so heavy. Sometimes it was hard to sing a merry
song. I asked grandma again and again to tell me about her. Once I
heard her say, "Since Rosie died." I thought she must be somewhere, for
grandma said one night when she sat in her arm chair by the fire, "Dear
little Rosie, I shall go to her, but she shall not return to me."

[Illustration: SINCE ROSIE DIED.]

Spring began to come again. I could see from my window that a soft
green carpet was spread all over the earth. The trees blossomed out,
some in pink, and some in white, and the warm air filled the room from
open doors and windows. It was all so pretty and pleasant.

But now my door was never left open a minute, Angeline snapped it shut
when she did up my room, as quick as wink. I felt as if it was rather
hard to be such a prisoner when I was not used to it, and I began to
get gloomy and discouraged again. When I saw other birds hopping about
so gay and free, I used to tell grandma if she would only let me out a
few minutes, just to sit in that lovely little cherry-tree and taste
the blossoms, I would come right back. But she never paid any attention
to such talk. She did hang my cage outside her window, though, and the
branches of the elm drooped all about it. I had a good many visitors
there, and some of them were very pleasant.

[Illustration: WHEN I SAW OTHER BIRDS.]

Little Mrs. Bluebird slipped over often. She told me how she and Mr.
Bluebird worked for weeks making a lovely nest, lined with wool; and
she had four little speckled eggs, and had commenced sitting on them
when some bad boys tore down the nest and carried it off, eggs and all.

[Illustration: MAKING A LOVELY NEST.]

I wondered if it was Bob. She said she was discouraged, and she
believed she would like to live in a little house like mine and be
taken care of. After I had told her my troubles, she thought that
perhaps she was as well off as anybody.

And I, too, found that my lot was not the hardest there was. Robin
Redbreast told me that they all had passed through sad times that
spring. They came North too early; the whole family froze their feet,
and often went hungry to bed because not a crumb nor a bug was to
be found on the snow-covered ground. And if it had not been for our
grandma, they would certainly have starved. She put crumbs on the
piazza roof for them every morning. He thought he would be perfectly
happy in my home, with such a grandma. Then, besides, they had been
obliged to move their nest three times that spring, and every one that
visited me had complaints to make about the sparrows; they are a bad,
quarrelsome set. It seems they were invited here from Europe, and now
they act as if they owned all this country. I think they must be a
very low family. I don't see why they should put on such airs. They
are common enough looking birds with their dusty gray coats. Why! A
sparrow looks like a mouse by the side of some that used to come to
the elm—great, splendid creatures with scarlet vests and black velvet
coats, looking as if they belonged to the royal family. They were kind,
and polite, and modest, and they didn't come from Europe either. But
there! Grandma says it is wrong to say ill-natured things of people.

Every morning at four o'clock all the birds in our neighborhood held
a concert. They invited me to join it. They thought my voice would be
a great addition, they said. They wanted Mr. Bobolink and me to sing
a duet together. Then they put me down for a solo and all would join
in the chorus. I wanted to attend very much, but I was ashamed to find
that every morning by the time I got outside, the concert was over and
my friends had gone different ways to attend to the business of the
day. They were hard at work building nests, and they seemed so busy
and happy, hopping about among the boughs, or going long journeys and
coming back with twigs and bits of thread in their mouths.

[Illustration]

Every night they had a sort of party just before bedtime and such a
chattering as they kept up! Sometimes they held it in the elm-tree and
I put in a little word now and then. But the favorite meeting place was
in a grove across the street. Oh! How I longed to be out with them; my
life seemed so hum-drum by the side of theirs.



CHAPTER V.

[Illustration] SOMETHING happened when the summer was almost gone. One
day grandma shut the window and let me out in the room a few minutes,
so that my cage might have an extra cleaning. When Angeline brought it
back, she put me in it in a great hurry and hung it out in the usual
place. Hi! What did I see when she had left me? The door of my cage was
open! I looked at grandma; she was bending over her sewing and did not
see me.

"I'll just go out for a few minutes," I said to myself, "to get the
air, then I'll come back. I won't run away, not a bit."

I spread my wings and away I went, up, up, up. Was there ever anything
so nice as flying! I steered for a tall maple, and, there I sat and
rocked myself back and forth, and looked down on the whole world. Away
down ever so far I could see grandma at her window sewing. She had not
missed me yet. I could see Bob down on the lawn.

The dog was there too. How glad I was that I was up so high. Pretty
soon grandma got up and got a cherry, and came back to put it in my
cage. Poor grandma! How astonished and frightened she looked. She put
out her head and looked all about. Then she called, "Bob, see if you
can find Birdie. He is gone!"

Bob ran up and down, and shouted, and didn't seem to look anywhere but
right up in the sky. Then everybody in the house came out, and looked
in the hedge, and under the lilac, and in the evergreen. It was fun to
watch them.

Then somebody said, "There he is in the top of that tall maple."

Yes, there I was looking at them. I was ahead for once, and they
couldn't do a thing but stand and look at me.

"Let's send Tab up to scare her down," said Bob. "Come Tabby, Tabby,"
he called, and that dreadful old cat came walking out of the kitchen.

I didn't wait to see what would be done next. I spread my wings for a
long high fly out of reach of all cats and dogs and boys.

If you never flew, I can't begin to tell you how nice flying is. When
I was sure I was far enough away, I rested myself in a grove. I fell
asleep there, and had a nice long nap. When I awoke, I couldn't think
for a minute where I was. I was very hungry. I found a berry or two,
but they were almost gone. I thought I ought to go back now. I would
have liked to try to find the little brown house, but I was afraid if
I stayed any longer, grandma would be troubled about me, so I started
home, as I thought. On and on I went, but I could not find a big gray
house. Where was it? And where was I? I began to feel very tired, and
had to stop every few minutes to rest.

[Illustration: I HEARD A GREAT LONG M-E-O-W.]

It was growing dark, and I began to be afraid I should never find
grandma's house again. I flew wildly about till I was too tired to
move. It was dark, and I was lost! It's all very well to be free while
the sun shines, but when the dark night comes down, it's better for
a poor little bird like me to be in his own little house. Oh dear! I
thought, if only I hadn't gone out. I never meant to get so far away.
Grandma did know best, after all, and it seems one can't do the least
little wrong thing without suffering for it. I knew it was naughty to
go out, and now I was being punished for it.

These were my thoughts as I sat sad, and hungry, and wretched. I did
not dare to sleep up in a high tree. I was so tired I was afraid I
would fall and break my neck, so I curled up in a little low bush and
was just falling asleep when I heard a great long m-e-o-w. A cat! It
made my heart stand still. As soon as I could get strength I flew up in
a big tree. The wind blew so hard I was afraid it would blow the tree
down. The cat went off after a while, and I was just dropping off to
sleep again when a loud shrill voice said, "Tu-whoo, tu-whoo," and just
a little ways from me I saw two big eyes that looked like fire-balls. I
thought it must be some great monster come to swallow me up. I did not
dare to make a bit of noise. I hid behind some big leaves and shut my
eyes tight so that he couldn't see me, and I sat and trembled.

How I thought then of my pretty cage hanging empty in grandma's room,
and wished, oh! so much, that I was only in it. There was very little
sleep for me that night.

I was glad when the sky began to get red in the east. Then soon after I
heard a stir and twitter from some other birds. This cheered me up; I
ventured to peep out. The big eyes were gone, and the first rays of the
sun were peeping into my tree. The great drops of dew lay all about me.
I was so glad, for I had been thirsty all night, and there is no sweet
good drink like dew. The next thing was to go out and hunt up some
breakfast. I didn't know which way to turn to find something. I went
toward the place where I heard the voices of other birds. I made sure
first that they were not those saucy blue-jays, or cross sparrows, then
I flew right down among them. I was glad to find that they belonged to
the same families with whom I was acquainted. I guess they were cousins.

[Illustration: I GUESS THEY WERE COUSINS.]

They all gathered around me as if I were a great sight. They were very
kind to me, and said they would show me where to get some breakfast,
but when I saw what it was—bugs and worms—I turned away. I had to
tell them that I couldn't eat such as that if I starved. Some of them
laughed at me then, and said I was putting on airs.

Then old mother Robin spoke up and said, "Children, don't be rude. This
little stranger has not been used to eating such food. Come with me, my
child, and I will show you where you can find some seeds."

So she took me to a large, lovely garden, and showed me how to get the
seeds out of some little balls that were growing there. They were very
sweet and good.

I stayed with these birds a long time, for after a few days I gave
up trying to find either of my homes. I saw in my journeys a good
many little brown houses and tall gray ones, but they were never the
right ones. So I settled myself down to an outdoor life, and was quite
content. I helped the other birds. I brought bits of things that I
found to them, and went out with them to hunt bugs for their little
ones; it was great fun to do that. I went with the robins just before
dark often to get worms. They would stamp on the ground, then the worms
that live way down under ground would come and poke their heads up to
see who was knocking at their door, and the robins would snatch them up
in their bills and be off.

[Illustration: EVERYTHING LOOKS FRESH AND CLEAN.]

We had grand concerts. The first one was always at four o'clock in the
morning. The world is very beautiful then. Everything looks fresh and
clean. It is a wonderful sight to see the sun get up. There is a great
glory in the sky just before he comes. The little pink-edged clouds lie
all around, and the dewdrops sparkle like thousands of diamonds. Only
birds enjoy it, though. People stay in their beds and sleep, just when
the world is the very prettiest. I have often wondered why all little
boys and girls did not go to bed when birds do, and get up when they
do, and not miss the best of everything. The four o'clock concert is
given by the birds on purpose to make folks wake up to enjoy things.
But they will not—only just a few; the others scold. They turn over and
say, "I wish those little scamps would stop that noise." I've heard
them many a time.

[Illustration: MY FRIENDS TOOK LONG JOURNEYS.]

My friends took long journeys, and I often went with them. But I could
not stand it to fly as fast or as long as they did, and often stopped
by the way and rested till they returned. One day I stopped in a grove
and had a nice sleep. Then I waited a long time for them, but they
didn't come. And they never came; I never saw them again! It grieved me
very much. I thought they might at least have said "good-by" to me. I
remembered that they had told me they always went South every fall and
stayed until spring. And now they were gone, and I was sad and lonely.

There were no birds left very soon, except swallows and sparrows, and
I never had been sociable with them. The nights grew very cold. I had
to get in the evergreen-tree and tuck my feet under me, or they would
have been frozen. The seeds were all gone out of the garden. I lived on
crumbs that people threw out in their dooryards. One day a few little
flakes of snow came down. That frightened me. What if great heaps of it
were to come and cover up all the crumbs!

Oh, how dreary the pretty world begun to look! The leaves all gone
from the trees, the branches bare, and the green hills turned to dingy
brown; the rain drip, dripping all day long. I sat on the fence for
long hours, and watched and looked at every little girl to see if it
were not Rita or Dody. I went to all the tall houses to try to find
grandma's window. I thought how she sat in the twilight by the fire,
humming her sad little songs, and wondering where I was. Oh, dear
grandma! If she would only come out to look for me, I would fly right
into her arms. Day after day I sat and mourned. I grew thin, and my
feathers fell out, and I felt sick. Where were all my friends?

[Illustration: HOW DREARY THE PRETTY WORLD BEGAN TO LOOK.]

One morning I sat on a bush not far from a house. A cold rain was
drizzling down, and I was cold and hungry. Just then a woman came
along, and before I knew what she was about she threw a handkerchief
over my head and caught me. I struggled hard to get away, for I did
not like the looks of the woman. I thought I would rather stay out and
starve than to live with her. She had a rough, red face, and her dress
was soiled and torn. Her shoes wouldn't stay on, and her hair straggled
over her face. She held me tight and took me into the house. A pack of
ragged children ran to meet her.

How shall I begin to tell you what I felt when I looked around that
house? It was bare and dreadful looking. There was no carpet or
curtains, and nothing but a broken stove and table, a chair or two,
and some ragged beds on the floor in one end of the room. The children
had dirty faces and tangled hair and ragged clothes. To think of my
Rose and Dody looking like that! Every one of them wanted to take me
the same minute, and they snatched me about from one to another, and
squeezed me up as if they thought I was made of paper.

Pretty soon the woman brought a small box, and said in a loud voice
that made me shudder, "Give him to me this minute!"

She lifted the cover, plumped me in and shut it quick. There I was, in
the dark. After a while she fixed it so that a little ray of light came
in, and I could see a cup of water and a piece of bread. But though
I was almost starved my heart was too heavy to eat. To think that I
should ever have come to this—a prisoner in such a place. How could I
ever have been unhappy in that sweet dear home that I first ran away
from. I tell you, it's thinking what might have been, and that it is
our own fault that it doesn't be, that is the hardest part to bear when
you get into trouble.

I tried to resign myself to the thought that I was to stay in that dark
place forever. But after a long time, they took me out and put me in
a little rough cage made of splintery sticks nailed together. And now
began the very hardest part of my life. The father came home, and he
was a great big shaggy man, with fierce eyes and a red nose. He scolded
and knocked the children about, and drank all the time from a big black
bottle, and smoked till I was almost choked, and said bad words, and
got worse and worse till he fell asleep. Day after day he went through
that.

Bob's tormentings were nothing to what I had to suffer now. Bill and
Sam and Betty and Sal quarreled over me, and pulled me about from
morning till night. It is a wonder I did not die. Still, my feathers
grew in again, and I began to feel stronger, but I did not sing. I went
over some sad little chirrupings that meant, O, dear Rose! O, grandma!
O, Dody! Won't some of you come to help me? What a dismal, wretched
home it was. Nothing but cuffs, and kicks, and scoldings through the
dreary weeks. I am only a little bird, but I would like to speak out
and tell all boys and girls that they ought to be very happy if they
have enough to eat and wear, a kind father and mother, and a pleasant
home.

One night I saw that big fierce man looking sharp and long at me. I
thought it meant something, and it did. For early the next morning,
before it was scarcely light, while all the rest were asleep, he
slipped softly up to me, took down my cage, hid it under his coat and
went out.

I shivered when I felt the frosty air, both with cold and fear. I
didn't know what this bad man would do to me. Perhaps he was going to
kill me! He walked on and on a long ways. We did not pass many houses
at first. At last he went through a long street, and another, till he
came to the edge of the village and stopped before a house where a man
was mending his gate. He asked him if he wanted to buy a bird.

"No," said the man, and went on with his hammering without looking at
me.

I peeped out at him and his pretty home. Oh I how I wished I could
speak and beg him to take me. Then the bad man said he wanted to sell
him very much; that he was a poor man and had no money to buy breakfast
for his family. Then the nice man laid down his hammer, and came close
and took a good look at me.

"Where did you get this bird?" he asked. And when he had been told, he
said, right away, "I'll take him!"

And he pulled out some money and handed it over, and took me and went
up the walk to the house as fast as he could.

"Could this be the little brown house?" I thought.

No, this was a white house, with green blinds. But there was the porch,
and the apple-tree and the broad stones just the same. And was that
leafless bush the lilac? And who was the chubby little girl in a long
nightgown that bounded into the room as soon as I was inside? My dear
Dody? It was, it was surely Dody.

She shouted and clapped her hands and cried, "Papa, is that Puff? O,
where did you get him?"

"Look and see if it is Puff," he said.

She bent over me just a minute, then she said, "Yes, it's my dear
Puffy. It's his hind toe; it is, it is! Don't you know, papa, the nail
was crooked and shorter than the others, and there's the topknot on his
head. Oh, I must have him in my hand just a minute, the dear darling!"

And she took me in her warm, soft hands, and laid me to her cheek and I
was happy, and Dody looked as if she were.

Then she took me into the little bedroom that I remembered so well, and
there lay Rita still fast asleep. Dody put my bill close to her cheek,
and I kissed her.

Then she sat up quick, and said, "Why! Why! Where am I?"

And Dody laughed till she cried. Then father and mother came in, too,
and they all talked and wondered together about me.

When breakfast was ready, they let me come and eat with them. I cannot
tell you if I try, what a happy, happy time it was when I sat and sung
again at morning prayers, in the pretty little sitting-room with the
sun shining straight into my cage.

I am at last perfectly happy and contented. I have tried everything I
thought I wanted, and it wasn't what I thought it was, and now I am
back in the old place, and here was what I wanted all the time and I
didn't know it. Silly Puff!

It is out of fashion to put a moral after a story, but I am going to
have one to mine.


   MORAL.—If you should be thrown into bad company, don't take their
advice.

   It takes only one little minute to do something that may cause months
of sorrow.

   Be content.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF PUFF ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


